Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, the most serious economic problem facing our
nation today is the deadlock between labor and management in the steel industry. Negotiations,
mediation and fact-finding swim around before the public's eye. In full-page advertisements
placed by labor and management, each argues that the other is wrong. In the midst of this
impasse, the public enters flounders and the consumer wonders. When the smoke is cleared
away, well, John Cue public's pocketbook stagger under another blow. Whether price of paper
clips and pots and pans and pumps and pyromores, and everything else John Cue must buy, clam
another rum on the ladder of inflation when the sound and fury have subsided. Well, why
are big steel and the steel workers locked in this gigantic wrestling match? Each with an
identical hammer lock on the other. What are the conflicting positions of labor and management,
which have produced this desperate drawout? Management rests this case essentially on the
assumption that the time has come to halt what it calls inflationary wage increases.
Management also says that it must have higher profits in order to finance the future expansion
of the industry. Labor bases its case largely upon the assumption that the steel companies
can easily afford to grant a wage boost without incurring an increase in cost, the cost of
the increase in labor productivity. Labor also believes profits of the steel companies are
excessive and wants to share in these profits. Labor and management both insist that they
have the consumers interest at heart. Well, many facts have been produced from the series
of administered price hearings before the antitrust and monopoly subcommittee of which
I am chairman. This past week, one of the newest facts to reach the public came in the announcement
by the steel companies themselves of their profits for the first half of this year. Profits
after taxes for 14 companies accounting for three-fifths of the industry's capacity jumped
145 percent over the first half of last year. The industry leader, United States Steel
Corporation, with 28 percent of our steel making capacity, netted $255 million. This is
88 percent more than the US steel netted for the same period last year. Well, friends,
we are face to face today with a fundamental problem in the steel industry. In the future,
this problem is going to confront us in other industries. Our public policy always has
been toward industry in the past. It has been based on the theory of price competition.
If any firm and a competitive industry makes an improvement which reduces its cost, it
is assumed that it will reduce its prices accordingly. The other firms will have to make the
improvement themselves or lose the business of the firm which made the improvement. The
pioneering company gains increased business at least for a time while the consumer receives
the benefit of the annulvation in the form of lower prices. But where there is no real price
competition as in the steel industry, you just can't apply this theory. The problem we face today
in non-competitive price industries is how to affect an equitable distribution of productivity gains
made possible by scientific progress. Labor claims these gains. It argues that labor is being
displaced by technological progress. Management bases its claims on the need for installation
of new and better machinery and equipment. It argues that greater profits are required for this.
But the consumer has a claim too. John Cue Public argues that there is no purpose to scientific
progress unless it results ultimately in lower prices or better products. While translating this
into the context of the present steel controversy, I believe the consumer should continue to be the
principle beneficiary of technological progress. I believe there is ample room without undue reduction
in profits for price reduction in steel, together with a small increase in wages, preferably in the
form of an increase in pensions, which would give greater time to enjoy life to the older workers
and greater opportunity to the younger ones. Until this problem is faced with the nation and
by all divisions of our government, I am afraid the wage-price spiral will keep spending higher and
higher and the value of John Cue Public's dollar will plunge lower and lower. But I hope this is not
going to be the case. Thank you until next week at this time.